diplomats have been discussing various
scenarios for Gaza after the conflict is
over but there's widespread disagreement
even within Israel about what Gaza would
look like the day
after shuttle diplomacy US Secretary of
State Anthony blinkin just spent a week
in the Middle East hustling from Capital
to Capital Consulting with Israel and
other allies he laid down some ground
rules for a post-war scenario in today's
meetings I was also uh crystal clear
Palestinian civilians must be able to
return home as soon as conditions allow
they must not be pressed to leave Gaza
not everyone in the Israeli government
agrees two far-right ministers have
called for renewed settlements in Gaza
and for other countries to absorb
Palestinian
refugees defense minister yuav Galant
put forth his own Vision earlier this
month he said no Israeli civilians would
be in
Gaza Galant said Gaza residents are
Palestinian therefore Palestinian bodies
will be in charge with the condition
that there will be no hostile actions or
threats against the state of
Israel he stressed that Israel would
maintain overall Security Control in
Gaza that plan has not been backed by
other members of the cabinet or by prime
minister Benjamin
Netanyahu with so much disagreement what
does everyone actually want in postwar
Gaza Israel wants security from attacks
and says there should be no role for
Hamas the US and Saudi Arabia want the
Palestinian Authority which governs the
West Bank to also run Gaza in a United
Palestinian government the Saudis say
they want to normalize relations with
Israel but that depends on the
establishment of a Palestinian
State the US and Saudi proposals face
significant obstacles one is the
unpopularity of the PA among
Palestinians its leader Mahmud abas is
extremely unpopular recent polls put him
at 11% and hamas's popularity has grown
since the war
started Netanyahu has rejected a role
for the PA as well but he's agreed to
one key us
demand Israel has no intention of
permanently occupying Gaza or displacing
its civilian population Israel is
fighting Hamas terrorists not the
Palestinian population Netanyahu has
however repeatedly dismissed the
possibility of Palestinian in
statehood well let's look at Future
options with Simon maban who's professor
of international politics at England's
Lancaster University he has a particular
expertise in the Middle East welcome
back to at DW Professor so medium to
long term uh what do you think post-war
Gaza is likely to look
like well I think what we will be seeing
is a very very long struggle to
determine both the political nature of
the
postwar state the post occupation State
perhaps um but we'll also be dealing
with a very very
long-term uh rebuilding process
rebuilding the key institutions the
infrastructure the the necessary
features of life in Gaza and these will
go hand inand but they're going to be
very very complicated to go hand inand
and how one addresses one issue will
directly affect the other they are
deeply politicized issues and it's going
to be a very very fraught very tense
struggle to try and mitigate the the
concerns and amarate the worries of
everyone so even the day after the
bombing stops the next months possibly
even years are still going to be
miserable for for people living in
Gaza yeah certainly uh let's go back to
before October the 7th before those
those awful incidents the terrorist
attacks in Israel the devastating
bombardment life in Gaza was incredibly
precarious it was fraud it was difficult
it was under an occupation it was under
a blockade it was very difficult to get
the basic things into Gaza that people
needed for daily life and right now your
your uh package just showed that 85% of
gazans have been forced from their homes
a lot of those homes have been
demolished have been destroyed in
fighting and so there's going to be a
very difficult struggle to rebuild
schools homes hospitals the basic
infrastructure that people need on top
of the broader political issues that
that we've been talking about so let's
look at political control Hamas grown in
popularity uh since all this happened
poll of Palestinians in Gaza indicated
that 90% of Palestinians want president
m mmud Abbas to resign so the the US
idea of the Palestinian Authority being
in charge of of Gaza certainly sounds
like a
non-starter yeah I don't think there are
all that many who are in favor of Mahmud
Abbas becoming the the the person ruling
Gaza or at least responsible for taking
the day-to-day decisions about life in
Gaza the Israelis certainly Benjamin
Netanyahu isn't too keen on that idea uh
there are many who perhaps like the idea
of the PA of the Palestinian Authority
taking control over life in Gaza but
much as we're seeing in the West Bank
abass does not have that popular support
that popular mandate that previous
leaders of the PA of the PLO such as Yad
Arafat had and that is a big problem if
there is a democratic legit deficit or a
legitimacy deficit that makes governing
that makes politics incredibly difficult
final word then on Israel's place in the
Middle East as a result of everything
that happened since October the 7th it's
antagonized it its biggest backer the US
it's upset countries like Saudi Arabia
in the region who'd been looking to
normalize relations and of course
there's Iran sitting there waiting for
the worst to happen how do you do you
anticipate this conflict uh having
affected Israel's future position in the
Middle East
I think what we're seeing is that the
there has been an opening up of deep
seated latent fishes deep schisms that
have been there across the Middle East
that the diplomats have been working
incredibly hard to address to try and
find some sort of resolution to we see
that with Saudi and Iran their
normalization we see it with the Saudis
and the houthis we see it with the
Israelis and the Saudis we see lots of
diplomatic initiatives going on but
what's happened with October the 7th and
its aftermath is that a lot of those
frustrations that anger those tensions
have come to the fall once more now I do
think normalization with the Saudis will
take place I think there is a lot
invested in that it's a matter of time
but for now we are in a very precarious
position where there are lots of
different moving Parts there's a lot of
anger a lot of frustration and that
means a lot of combustible elements
thank you for that Professor Simon maban
from Lancaster
University thank
you now let's get some analysis with Dr
Julie Norman she's an associate
professor in politics and international
relations at University College London
has also authored several books about
the Palestinian political resistant and
is currently writing a book on
contemporary history in Gaza Dr Norman
what title would you give the current
chapter in gaza's
history well I think one of the only
words we can use right now is is Crisis
obviously this crisis started uh on
October 7th for many Israelis but the
way that the war has been conducted
since has just really been an
unprecedented level of of Crisis for
gazin not only in the casualty rate that
we keep hearing going up every day in in
the headlines but also of course the
displacement the rising rates of Famine
of health concerns and just a complete
Devastation of infrastructure in a
society that um is going to be very
difficult to rebuild from afterwards
right now of course there's also worries
about crisis expanding even throughout
the region and and all these crisis of
course are just having the most effect
on un civilians in all of these
communities and that's something that's
going to be very difficult to recover
from now the current War erupted of
course after Hamas attacked Israel on
October 7th did you see signs of this
escalation
earlier well obviously we everyone who
follows the Israel Palestine conflict
this is not um near the first time that
we've seen uh an episode but the scale
of the episode on October 7 the scale of
the attack I would say was surprising
and was rather unprecedented with that
said there have been ongoing tensions
between Israel and Gaza for decades and
especially between Israel and Hamas over
the last 15 years we've seen a series of
what are often called the Gaza Wars um
starting in 2008 2009 another very
significant one in 2014 and other
punctuations as well some of those in
hindsight are um much more smaller scale
than what we're seeing now but a similar
sense of um moving in from israeli's
perspective for security concerns trying
to go after Hamas but at the same time
devastating many civilian communities
and infrastructure in the meantime and
so all these things I would say have
been building for for quite a while now
let's talk about Gaza after the war
we've seen several options that are on
the table there in our report what do
you think it will look
like it's extremely difficult to see
that right now as the report noted there
are different options that have been put
forward as a result of uh Anthony
blinken's shuttle diplomacy last week we
have seen real commitment actually from
numerous Partners in the region to
assist with the Reconstruction but
that's predicated on the idea that there
will be some kind of Pathway to
Palestinian statehood and that's
something that Israel is just simply not
going for right now the US would like to
see some role for the Palestinian
Authority the governing body in the West
Bank but has also been noted they are
extremely weak and have very little
little legitimacy um publicly so I think
we'll probably see a couple different
phases after the war my sense is that
Israel will maintain a security presence
for quite a while probably some sort of
transitional Government after that but
the real question is if there's actually
going to be some real substantive change
that gazin want that Palestinians want
that could actually lead to some kind of
statehood that would actually address
some of the deeper roots of the conflict
now do you see any circumstances under
which this statehood may still
happen I think it's very difficult to
see that right now at the same time
anytime we do have a crisis like this we
do try and look at it as an inflection
point can this somehow change the status
quo and at least get us talking in new
ways about statehood about a two-state
solution these kinds of models that
honestly have been on the table for
quite a while now but have not had the
momentum um I think we could maybe talk
about a a 3 to 5% chance of that as
composed to opposed to a 1% chance
before all this so it's still very slim
but I do think it's important to note
the fact that the US the Palestinian
Authority most Partners in the region
most Arab states are now talking
seriously about that um and it's a real
question of what that might look like on
the ground and what kind of buying it
can have most importantly from
Palestinians and
Israelis Dr Julie Norman there many
thanks for sharing your expertise with
us thank
you